---
id: 379
title: Descriptive Statistics Intro
date: 2017-02-22T11:38:18+00:00
author: iam@ibrahimokdad.com
layout: post
guid: http://ibrahimokdad.com/?p=379
permalink: /2017/02/22/379/
image: /wp-content/uploads/2017/02/analytics.png
categories:
  - Content
tags:
  - descriptive statistics
---
<p style="text-align: justify;">
  Before diving into Descriptive statistics let us get acquainted with the commonly used terminologies. Starting with:
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;"><strong>Constructs</strong> are  anything that can be constructed by some events. Meaning there can be many </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">factors </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">than can come to play. It is hard to measure constructs. Let me give you some examples of constructs first then explain them. Examples are: age, memory, happiness, guilt..etc; </span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Now how is age a construct? It is a tricky example; The reason for it being a construct is that age can be stated as numbers of years, numbers of months, or even numbers of week. Age can also be expressed in terms of how mature you are or even how wise you are. So multiple factors or reasons could build the meaning. </span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Here is an example for you to think about. Your monthly salary in Euros (&#8230; ←- the dots represents 5 seconds) okay time&#8217;s up; You monthly salary in Euros is </span><b>not</b><span style="font-weight: 400;"> a construct because we are very specific here and there is alway one way to represent the salary and is in Euros.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <!--more-->
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">You know how I used the term factors earlier to describe the what build up the construct? Okay so in statistics they are called </span><b>Operational Definitions</b><span style="font-weight: 400;">. So Operational Definitions measure the construct. Take Stress construct; if you think about it. It can be measured by your resting heart rate (this is one operational Definition) or it can be measured by blood pressure (another operational definition).. And so on. So anything that has multiple ways to measure it is called the construct; the ways of measure are called operational definitions.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Assuming you start to work with a construct as in for example you started measuring how happy people are? you should consider or keep in mind what is called </span><b>Extraneous Factors (lurking variables) </b><span style="font-weight: 400;">They are basically other Operational Definitions that could impact the outcome. Now there is something one should always keep in mind. Correlation does not prove causation: For example sleep does not necessarily enhance memory; true that it might; but not necessarily does; because there can be many extraneous factors.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">With those basic concepts in mind we shall proceed forward.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Let us start with the population. When take the average It has the following symbol: </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">symbol. However when we take a sample from the population its average is denoted as: </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">x</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Intuitively to get the difference between the sample average and the population average we just subtract the two. The difference is called sampling error Sampling Error= [latexpage]$\mu-x$.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Most of the time we plot the samples or population to have a better understanding of how data is. We call the variable in the x axis the independent variable or predictor variable. we call the y axis the dependent variable or the outcome.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">The type of goal you want to achieve defines the type of experiment/test to conduct. To show relationships (ex: relation of sleep to better memory) we tend to use observational studies or surveys.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">To show causation (ex: the more sleep the better your memory) we use controlled experiment.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">In many cases or studies; Surveys are the go to mostly because they are easy, relatively inexpensive, can be remote, anyone can access and analyze survey results.However they are vulnerable to what is called response biases if questions were not clear. If a respondent did not answer a question it is called non-response bias.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">There are studies freely available with its data a popular one is the  Educational Longitudinal Study which was carried out in 2002.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">When it comes to controlled experiments (you have seen this in movies) </span><b>Placebo</b><span style="font-weight: 400;">’s are used. They are basically fake treatments which are given to a group of participants so that the controlled group is not aware that they are being treated differently. Hence does not jeopardize the outcome. Given the result might change if they knew that they were given fake treatment.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">It is also called </span><b>Blinding</b><span style="font-weight: 400;">. It is basically not letting the participant know what can make them biased. Say a company is testing a pill. They distribute inactive pills (placebo) without any participant knowing if there is an active or inactive pill.</span>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">With controlled experiments researchers could take it up an extra level. They could use what is called </span><b>Double Blind treatment. </b><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is when neither the researcher nor the participant knows which treatment is being used; for the pills example neither the researcher monitoring nor the participants know which pills nor the categories. This way you also get rid of the researcher being biased or even missing details.</span><br /> <span style="font-weight: 400;">Experiments are best to find causality (read that again if you read it causality).</p> 
  
  <p>
    See you in the next post.</span>
  </p>